Laurie Baker’s Legacy and the Democratization of Indian Architecture

Save this picture! Pierced by traditional jali openings, brick walls of the CDS are transformed into lace. Image © Addison Godel

In India, brick as a construction material holds memory, meaning, and modernity. From the aligned fired bricks of the Indus Valley Civilization to the intricate brick jaalis that decorate homes, public buildings, and landmarks, the material's legacy is deeply embedded within the subcontinent's architectural identity. Yet no one has shaped the narrative of brick in modern Indian architecture more eloquently than Laurie Baker.

+ 9

Revered as the "Gandhi of Architecture," Baker's work was able to shift perceptions of how Indians perceive brick. Through his work, he was also immensely successful in educating the public on the responsibilities of the architect in a society defined by economic disparity and climatic complexity. Amongst public admiration for concrete and glass structures, he demonstrated to India and its architects how humility and beauty need not be mutually exclusive.

In the mid-1940s, British-born architect Laurie Baker started his career in India at the urging of Mahatma Gandhi to uplift communities left impoverished by colonial rule. Deeply rooted in the values of social equity, simplicity, and localism, Baker grew his practice in the state of Kerala and later in the southern hills of Thiruvananthapuram. Homes, clinics, schools, and churches all cropped up with a distinctive aesthetic - Baker's touch - a revival of brick.

Related Article Exploring Fluid Forms in Indian Architecture: A Cultural Perspective

Although his architecture outwardly portrayed a unique visual identity, his design of form and choice of material was grounded in deeper philosophies. Brick was an honest material. While its price and availability influenced its rampant use in his work, the material did not pretend to be something that it wasn't.

"A good building does not hurt the landscape but one which makes the landscape more beautiful than it was before the building was built", the architect once proclaimed. His talent for creating resilient, efficient, and context-aware architecture for clients across the social spectrum spoke to this vision.

Through techniques like rat-trap bond construction - a cavity wall method that reduced brick usage by 25% while improving insulation - Baker ensured affordability, climate responsiveness, and a unique visual rhythm. He used brick jaalis to create playful patterns of light and air, enabling homes to breathe naturally in tropical heat while maintaining privacy. He kept walls unpainted and unfaced, letting brick age gracefully with time and weather.

Baker's real innovation lay in repositioning brick from a rustic, low-cost fallback to a material of dignity and innovation in the subcontinent. His humbly scaled buildings were massive in terms of purpose. Designing for marginalized communities, he demonstrated how architecture could be aesthetic without being elitist.

Echoes of Baker in Contemporary India

Almost twenty years after his passing, Baker's influence resonates as strongly as it did in the early days of his work. In a rapidly urbanizing India, where climatic resilience and economic equity are urgent imperatives, architects across the country embrace brick out of conviction.

Pirouette House pays homage to Laurie Baker's legacy by implementing traditional brick construction techniques. The house features exposed brick walls in a rat-trap bond pattern, promoting natural ventilation and reducing material use. The project supports local industries and provides employment opportunities By sourcing bricks from local, small-scale kilns. Here, architecture studio Wallmakers aligns with Baker's philosophy of integrating architecture with community welfare.

4site Architects' Brick Weave House reinterprets traditional weaving patterns in its façade using brick, inspired by the weavers' colony in which it's located. The home's envelope becomes both a metaphor and a functional skin, preserving privacy and celebrating heritage. The project extends innovation with brick in the country, offering a precedent for contemporary architects to build upon.

Even in rural India, brick is enabling dignified, climate-conscious design. The Rural Library by pk_iNCEPTiON in Maharashtra uses large brick arches and an open courtyard to create a multipurpose reading space for children and adults alike. Here, brick enables investment in social infrastructure.

In India's varied and often extreme climates, brick remains a time-tested material. Its thermal mass helps regulate temperature in both hot and cold environments. When used in cavity walls or paired with passive cooling strategies such as cross-ventilation, shading, and evaporative courtyards, it reduces the need for mechanical HVAC systems.

Contemporary studios like maqam are taking brick even further by recycling it with marble dust into plasters. Their project Mayalogil in Hyderabad integrates brick into the structure in this manner. Other architects are adopting compressed stabilized earth blocks (CSEBs), made from brick kiln waste and site soil, to reduce embodied carbon and promote circular construction practices.

There is also a sensory dimension to brick with its color, texture, and contextual familiarity. In projects like the Brick Veedu House in Madurai, the architects used exposed brick walls, Chettinad doors, and Athangudi tiles to create a domestic environment that feels both timeless and contemporary.

These homes speak the language of tradition, without mimicking it. Brick evokes the memory of ancestral homes, shaded aangan courtyards, and the red dust of summer. In a country experiencing rapid technological and cultural change, these associations offer a means for cultural continuity.

Laurie Baker's legacy extends far beyond the brick. It lies in the values that material embodies - honesty, restraint, empathy, and resilience. He taught generations of Indian architects that it is possible to design ethically without sacrificing creativity.

With his work, Baker realized he needed to rebuild his knowledge from the ground up, learning directly from illiterate masons, carpenters, and their ancestral wisdom. Inspiration came from the character and lifestyles of the inhabitants as well as the challenges and opportunities inherent in each site. Good architecture isn't about spectacle, but about service to people, place, and the planet.

The legacy of brick encourages architecture that is affordable and accessible to economically disadvantaged communities. The use of local labor and traditional skills to empower artisans, rather than depending on expensive, mechanized construction further democratizes the design process. The material allows for climate resilience and durability to benefit communities unable to afford costly maintenance.

When Louis Kahn famously asked, "What does a brick want to be?", Laurie Baker spent his life answering it. In the hands of contemporary Indian architects, that answer continues to evolve across project typologies, contexts, and cultural landscapes.

This article is part of an ArchDaily series titled India: Building for Billions, where we discuss the effects of population rise, urbanization, and economic growth on India's built environment. Through the series, we explore local and international innovations responding to India's urban growth. We also talk to the architects, builders, and community, seeking to underline their personal experiences. As always, at ArchDaily, we highly appreciate the input of our readers. If you think we should feature a certain project, please submit your suggestions.

This article is part of the ArchDaily Topics: Rethinking Materials: Techniques, Applications and Lifecycle, proudly presented by Sto.



Sto sponsors this topic to emphasize the importance of digitized materials in architectural design. Its high-quality PBR-files, as demonstrated in a case study with the London-based architecture firm You+Pea, provide architects with precise tools for confident decision-making from concept to execution. This approach bridges virtual and physical realms, supporting more accurate and efficient design.



Every month, we explore a topic in-depth through articles, interviews, news, and architecture projects. We invite you to learn more about our ArchDaily Topics. And, as always, at ArchDaily we welcome the contributions of our readers; if you want to submit an article or project, contact us.